# Introduction

This book is _not_ about bashing jQuery. While I am personally very much in favor of directly utilizing native tools, the primary purpose of this book is not necessarily to compel developers to abandon all third-party solutions. This is not a stage to host a competition between jQuery and the web API. I have a great amount of respect for those who have maintained and supported jQuery since its inception. I mean no disrespect to those associated with jQuery. In fact, similar arguments could be about other libraries, such as underscore.js, lodash, or zepto.js. But the ubiquitousness of jQuery makes it the most appropriate reference for this book.

The purpose of this book is to _teach_ about the browser's native tools. Though, if you wish to continue using jQuery, you may do so (not that you need my permission). These posts will hopefully give you the confidence and knowledge you need to remove this dependency from your future projects, if you so choose. At the very least, by reading all of this, you will gain a better understanding of the web API and JavaScript as a language, which is important to your evolution as a web developer, whether you use jQuery or not. While I will stress use of the native web API and JavaScript sans jQuery, my intention is not to encourage JavaScript as a solution to all problems. As you will see, JavaScript and the web API are simply tools that may be used to solve _some_ problems. CSS and proper markup may be more appropriate solutions to some of these problems, as you will see later on. This is particularly true in the context of [effects and animations](#effects-and-animations).

In addition to instilling confidence in new web developers and those a bit overwhelmed by the browser's native API, "Beyond jQuery" has many other goals. I intend to teach you about the fundamentals, pitfalls, and best practices that are otherwise masked by jQuery. You will learn to perform common operations and solving common problems without the use of jQuery. I will also reveal why jQuery may have been necessary in the past, but is no longer needed with the advent of modern browsers and more evolved web and JavaScript specifications.

When you finish this book, you will be able to write more efficient client-side code by examining some performance issues associated with jQuery. Native alternative will be described as well. You will learn more about the browser's API, JavaScript, and even jQuery through detailed explanation and code examples. I will demonstrate how common operations are performed using jQuery, and then solve the same problems using the web API and "vanilla" JavaScript. "Beyond jQuery" will contain copious amounts of code snippets, including [a relatively simple but useful web application that will serve as a final and complete example](#putting-it-all-together) to demonstrate how to develop something substantial without the crutch of a third-party library.
